# The Honks that Fell Silent

Technically, my automotive web show only ever published 5 episodes (plus [the Toyota Avalon video](https://youtu.be/vC2-RAhBqu0),) but the amount of unpublished *Honk* material should just about match what’s available now if/when I’m able to gather the required funds and external drives to outsource the editing work. 6 years and two days ago (are you getting tired of the milestone thing, because *I*﻿ certainly am,) we recorded my thoughts on the [2011 Mitsubishi Eclipse GS Spyder](http://www.extratone.com/shife/driving-a-mitsubishi-eclipse-culture-cheapens-by-the-second/) (or something ridiculous like that) – the then-latest manifestation of an automotive product which we’d literally spent years disparaging as the lowest of the low in the design, cultural, and practical senses. Unlike the Juke or Versa, the Eclipse did nothing but affirm its crucifixion – I still vividly remember the sensation: operating the Eclipse feels like you’re driving an enlarged plastic pedal car.

I distinctly recall several car mechanics from different shops in a handful of separate municipalities independently making a point to emphasize how important it was that I buy *just about anything* but an Eclipse when I was going on 14 and prone to those premature conversations about buying my first car. Lewis – the talented mechanic my stepdad hired to restore the machine that would become my first – my brother-in-law’s early-90s extended cab Toyota Pickup – included something like “at least you didn’t end up with an Eclipse” in that last conversation before we drove it home, a thousand-yard stare of sincere trauma on his face.

> ﻿**There is nothing redeemable about the Mitsubishi Eclipse**. This I have suspected for years, and now confirmed. It is vulgar to look at, depressing to be around, and genuinely demeaning to drive.

But what was the purpose, exactly, of such an embarrassingly bargain-bin coverband of a vehicle? For a tiny, performance-oriented company like Mitsubishi to have survived the SUV and (now) Crossover eras thus far in the 21st century, they needed a popular sell. Yes, for the opportunity to have enjoyed that glorious Evo X, I must in large part thank the Eclipse, which has been [killed](https://web.archive.org/web/20110427085719/http://www.autoweek.com/article/20110425/CARNEWS/110429917) since and succeeded by the Eclipse Cross as the [Brand’s Breadwinner](http://www.thedrive.com/news/20738/mitsubishis-makeover-gives-sales-a-boost). 

Shortly after filming with the Eclipse, a curious theory smacked down upon me: what if the **entire existence** of these products with their mighty names had always been **a grand, century-spanning industry joke at the literal expense of the West’s most ignorant car buyers**? Malignant, maybe – but not malicious. What if Mitsubishi simply knew that America’s tasteless young men and women had long existed in a foul, rabid state of hunger for their dearly-beloved Wally World✪ Car? What if they recognized this weakness as their one opportunity to capitalize on the market trend they were least-equipped – even least-willing, perhaps – to survive?

Though a banker may suppose otherwise – as per their historically-pale market share – Mitsubishi is more than capable of such a plot, intellectually. The Lancer Evolution is a marvel of suspension and powertrain design.

✪ *Wal-Mart*