# inRoute Review

## A one-of-a-kind navigation experience for recreational driving enthusiasts and commuters, alike.

For my whole adult life, I've claimed that driving recreationally has been the one activity which has consistently brought me joy. Indeed, I have covered thousands and thousands of miles - mostly throughout my home state, Missouri - since first acquiring my license some 15 years ago. Though I was making less than $8 an hour at a tool store, I spent virtually all of it on what little fuel my NB Miata consumed across 15,000 of these in just our first summer together. I was 19 and - though I thought I'd been exposed to a great breadth of car culture - I did not realize just how much of it has absolutely nothing to do with *actually driving*.

There are plenty of very good reasons for this, of course - depreciation, danger, etc. - but in the decade since I owned that car[^1], I've nursed a hypothesis that feels more original than I'd like it to: I'm not sure local fast boys actually know *where to go* to enjoy their automobiles. Having just gotten back on the road for the first time in several years, this notion has become especially poignant thanks to frequent observations made in just the past eight or nine weeks. I've seen far too much fast boy behavior in *completely* inappropriate locales. (Full-throttle Hellcat acceleration downtown on a busy weekend evening, for instance.)

_However_, in tandem with these, I have also observed - having returned to the routes I would have once been able to prescribe more or less verbally in place of these contexts - that _all_ have become more risk-intensive settings in which to drive quickly. Route K between The Big Burr Oak and Rock Bridge High School - where I once spent my gas station lunch breaks [shuffling my dear, departed XJR](https://www.instagram.com/p/BKdP2upAqmn "Instagram Photo") through wooded, empty bends - has now been stricken with significantly greater traffic (motorists and otherwise,) and blessed with [roundabouts](https://beheard.como.gov/route-k-roundabout "Route K and Old Plank Road Roundabout"), as has Route WW East of US 63. The exact stretch of [Missouri Route 179](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Missouri_Route_179 "Missouri Route 179 - Wikipedia") on which [Myke's Evo X made me yell cartoonishly](https://davidblue.wtf/evo "Mitsubishi Lancer Evo X - HONK Preview on YouTube") featured _an actual pedestrian_ walking up the first blind hill the first time I revisited last summer.

The simple explanation is that the mid-Missouri area surrounding Columbia which I will probably occupy until after my casket drops has expanded dramatically in population. In so many ways, I have struggled with little success to adapt to this fact, recently, to the misfortune of those around me, but in this crucial aspect of driving as recreation, I have found some hope in the form of digital tools. Rekindling my interest in manifesting a multi-use social service for driving enthusiasts have been [RoadStr](https://app.roadstr.io/u/64dc60ffd1fd7c0011011807 "David Blue's profile on RoadStr") and [MyRoute](https://www.myrouteapp.com/profile/home/1269471 "David Blue's profile on MyRoute") - both of which allow routes to be shared and published. They also both have CarPlay-enabled iOS apps, though I'm afraid neither represent a suitable replacement when one need actually navigate.

The most essential application that's enabled me to explore and publish routes to these services has been **[inRoute](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/inroute-intelligent-routing/id703796787 "inRoute App Store Share URL")**, which appears on iOS, iPadOS, and macOS via Catalyst. Its CarPlay integration 

[^1]:	Which, it's perhaps relevant to note, is *for driving recreationally* far more than most, if that's not obvious.