# David Blue's Astrological Chart (Via Co-Star)

[https://www.costarastrology.com/neoyokel](https://www.costarastrology.com/neoyokel)


The sun determines your ego, identity, and "role" in life. It's the core of who you are, and is the sign you're most likely to already know. Your Sun is in Aquarius, meaning you are fundamentally unconventional and anti. Comfortable dissenting or straying from the norm, your intellectual talent of abstraction is oriented towards pushing the boundaries of what seems reasonable. You carry a lot on your shoulders and have need to fight for the underdog. It's in your seventh house, meaning you feel the need to distinguish yourself from others through close relationships and long-term partnerships.

Your ascendant is the "mask" you present to people. It can be seen in your personal style and how you come off to people when you first meet. Some say it becomes less relevant as you get older. It changes every two hours, so if it doesn't make sense, text your mom to confirm your birth time. Your Ascendant is in Leo, meaning you come across as bright, good-natured, and magnetic. Your energy makes you seem either like a know-it-all or a live wire—but always the center of attention.

The moon rules your emotions, moods, and feelings. This is likely the sign you most think of yourself as, since it reflects your personality when you're alone or deeply comfortable. Your Moon is in Leo, meaning your emotional self is dramatic, proud, expressive, idealistic, and somewhat self-centered. You need a lot of love, care, and validation from other people. It's in your first house, meaning you find security and safety through your self and self-image—and, because it's your first house, your Moon in Leo is hyper-present in your personality.

Mercury determines how you communicate, talk, think, and process information. It also indicates how you learn. It is the mind's planet. Your Mercury is in Aquarius, meaning your intellect is insightful, unconventional, and super meta. You have a rich imagination that allows you to think in a way that is abstracted from daily life. You enjoy intellectual banter, though you sometimes push your ideas on others. It's in your seventh house, meaning you are curious about and inclined to analyze your closest relationships and how they affect you.

Venus determines how and what you love. It indicates how you express affection and the qualities you're attracted to. Your Venus is in Aquarius, meaning your romantic side is unconventional, intellectual, and somewhat detached. You can be bubbly and obvious when you like someone, but typically you prefer forms of intimacy less obvious than romance. It's in your seventh house, meaning that for you, love is often expressed in close relationships and long-term partnerships.

Mars is the planet of aggression. It determines how you assert yourself, take action, and the energy that surrounds you—particularly in your sex life, your ambitiousness, and when you're angry. Your Mars is in Capricorn, meaning you assert yourself in a way that is responsible and efficient, and you think things through very intentionally. Highly motivated by ambition, your rationality sometimes seems soulless. It's in your sixth house, meaning you put a lot of energy into routines.

Uranus stays in each sign for seven years, meaning it rules a generation more than a person. It rules innovation, rebellion, and progress. Your Uranus is in Capricorn, meaning other generations are shocked by your generation's sense of responsibility, seriousness, rationality, and hunger for power. It's in your sixth house, meaning that for you, this manifests in rebelling against dated expectations about routines.

Neptune stays in each sign for around fourteen years, meaning it rules a generation more than a person. It rules dreams, imagination, and the unconscious. Your Neptune is in Capricorn, meaning your entire generation finds inspiration through hard work, responsibility, seriousness, and ambition. It's in your sixth house, meaning that for you, this manifests in your ideal—verging on unrealistic and impractical—about routines.

Pluto stays in each sign for up to thirty years, meaning it rules a generation more than a person. It rules power, intensity, obsession, and control. Your Pluto is in Scorpio, meaning your generation's psyche is comparatively passionate, intense, serious, private, self-obsessed, and perceptive. It's in your fifth house, meaning you personally are transforming outdated definitions of romance, creativity, and pleasure.