Chuck Klosterman
Thanks to Peter Kafka's Recode Media [Local Backup], I have just discovered that former New York Times Magazine Ethicist, Sex, Drugs, and Cocoa Puffs author, and longtime sports/pop culture writer Chuck Klosterman pronounces his surname kloa-ster-men instead of klaw-ster-men, as I have for a good while. Unfortunately, I’ll probably continue to do so barring tremendous effort, alternating with Cuck Klusterfuck, but only when he gives in to his terrible habit of ending (spoken) statements with “or whatever.” A good friend of mine claims to have been a fan of his since she happened to pick up a few of his novels from a bulk book sale at 13 years old, but I've only just read his work this year (thanks to two borrowed volumes from her.)

This podcast is one of only three shows with which I make an effort to maintain 100% prevalence, so I did catch this episode when it aired late last August. Thanks to my friend, I did recognize his name and was swiftly entrapped in his intuition about publishing as I realized how keenly I identified with his perils, striding two seemingly irreconcilable cultures.

“I’m not fully accredited by either side of the professional equation (sportswriters think I’m too pretentious and music writers don’t think I’m pretentious enough,) but I’m able to write about whatever I want, as long as it actually happened.”

He speaks with keywords that should dismiss him immediately as a nostalgic, out-of-time pikey, but somehow end up communicating reasonable insight. In exploring his works since, I have continued to hinge on a single essential thought: Chuck Klosterman is the only white, 46-year-old bearded Portland Dad you should be reading. Of course, you should receive this suggestion in the knowledge that I am a newly-minted white Portland man myself, but I believe it's worthwhile to examine whether or not Klosterman's various fiction and non-fiction work should be relevant to young people right now, so I'm going to cite three relatively fresh expressions: the aforementioned interview, its subject - last year's collected anthology X: A Highly Specific, Defiantly Incomplete History of the Early 21st Century, and his 2011 novel The Visible Man.

In the continued interest of full disclosure, I should emphasize just how highly I regard Peter Kafka as an editor and interviewer on the Media beat - capable of hitting consistently hard on both novel and old guard industry personalities with refined, seemingly unimpeachable skepticism, but in this instance he is much more subdued - a tad bit bewitched, even, suggesting he regards Klosterman greatly. In fact, he introduces X with an outright confession: "It’s great. I bought it. I bought a signed copy," which, he says, "happens very rarely." It's more significant than it may appear - good ole' Chuck really is that comfortable and talented in the one-on-one, on-the-record environment, which is why the generous accumulation of his interviews in the anthology with a healthy span of athletes and musicians are so compelling, no matter how disinterested the reader may be in the particular wheelhouses for which the individuals are notorious. (American football.)

The only reason I’m able to ask you these questions is because I’m a reporter and I can ask you questions now that I probably wouldn’t feel comfortable asking you if we were friends, so I’m not going to pretend that we are and I’m not going to create some fake thing where we’re going to have a relationship beyond this conversation. I’m just going to ask you the things I want to know about and I hope that you respect the fact that I’m just being straight with you.” I find that that works much better.

From the broadest possible pop cultural lens, Chuck's most spectacular and widely-circulated work, demographically (I assume) is his 2015 interview and cover story for GQ with Taylor Swift, then "the most popular human alive." Yes, it really is worth dwelling on the image: this guy... this very Dorky Dad, hanging out with the most highly-demanded teen idol who's ever lived, sitting awkwardly next to her in the backseat of her car as she excitedly accepts a call from Justin Timberlake. When one Chucks such a distinguished contrast upon such a high-profile contemporary medium, the weight of the potential scrutiny becomes palpable, but Klosterman anticipates and braces for this (very risky) business in the only manner he can: acknowledging it over and over and over again in the second paragraph of his every interview appearance. From his own preface in X:

Something you may notice in the following 2015 feature on Taylor Swift is that I never describe what she looks like or how she was dressed, even though I almost always do that with any celebrity I cover... If I did, it would be reframed as creepy misogyny and proof that I didn't take the woman seriously as an artist. It would derail everything else about the story. It would become the story.

And we compare with another excerpt from Peter Kafka’s interview:

It doesn’t matter if it was complimentary or insulting necessarily. It would seem as though I wasn’t taking her seriously as a musical artist, and the idea is that I do. That’s why I’m writing about her is because I do think she’s a meaningful, significant artist. It’s not worth the risk of having the story then get shifted by other people who perhaps just perceive themselves as somebody who’s a watchdog for certain signifiers or certain elements of the culture and that their job is to be on the watch for this. If your story then gets moved into that silo, that’s all it’s going to be remembered for... It’s a touchier thing now. It’s a more dangerous thing.

Notice how very close this argument comes to falling into standard white guy whining about societal changes and modern feminism without actually doing so. (I declare so definitively not because of my authority, alone, but because I know - as does Klosterman - that if it had, his ass would've been entirely grass, long ago.) More than any other writer of his demographic, Chuck Klosterman has a close, wary relationship with the everchanging contextual boundaries of public expression. He knows when to be transparent with his feelings on progression, and he's careful to avoid what could be "problematic" for the sake of functioning better as a writer, according to him. For Slate's I Have to Ask, he managed to speak extensively on the subject for nearly an hour without bellowing anything definitively cringey.

I can’t say it’s better or worse. It’s just different, and because it’s different, it makes me feel uncomfortable, but there’s actually like an adversarial relationship with the history of anything, and that somehow that history is seen as oppressive. And you shouldn’t even know about it. It’s better to live in now.

Granted, it's not as if his persistent acknowledgement of this position has miraculously washed all systematic patriarchal traces away from his high-profile feature of a young woman on the cover of a magazine which seeks most to speak to "all sides of the male equation," (are you sure about that, Condé Nast?) especially considering how unlikely it would've been for me to read anything about Taylor Swift outside of this very white man's anthology.

Here we see Swift’s circuitous dilemma: Any attempt to appear less calculating scans as even more calculated. Because Swift’s professional career has unspooled with such precision, it’s assumed that her social life is no less premeditated.

As in Klosterman's work, I've found a very fundamental pillar in my own writing in control: how we attain more of it, how we lose it, and how to use it, which is the defining, permeating orbit of the Taylor Swift piece, as I’d imagine it should be, given how deep her internal wrenching over being perceived as insincere eventually proved to go.

It’s somehow different when the hub of the wheel is Swift. People get skeptical. Her famous friends are marginalized as acquisitions, selected to occupy specific roles, almost like members of the Justice League (“the ectomorph model,” “the inventive indie artist,” “the informed third-wave feminist,” etc.). Such perceptions perplex Swift, who is genuinely obsessed with these attachments.

No, it’s not only worthwhile as an exercise in superbly athletic self-awareness – the Taylor profile is profound. I’d recommend reading it, especially if the subject matter is outside your wheelhouse.

User-uploaded image: file.png

Short, sharp, and occasionally somewhat petty notions are what Chuck Klosterman does best and most originally. Thanks to a digression of Kafka’s beginning with “you and I are about the same age…,” he arrives (by way of REM, believe it or not) at a significant statement about youth and identity.

“It seems strange to me to be into music for its coolness outside of high school. That seems like that’s the only time when you’re a young person and you’re using art basically to create a personality because you don’t have a real personality yet.”
Klosterman is debatably exempt from the traditional academic abstract of “objectivity” for the vast majority of his notable work in its stated primary subject: his “interior life,” which perhaps developed an existential muscle – a unique perspective – from which he’s been able to reflect particularly clearly on the profession in tandem with the experience he’s accumulated over the course of his career.
“You know, when you’re young, you’re a real emotional writer if you’re a writer… If I was a young person now, I would be incredibly attracted to the idea that when you’re 22 you can be a national writer, which was impossible when I was 22.”

In a way, Klosterman surmises that it is indeed its objectivity that media has lost, and that writing is no longer a “one-way relationship.”

It’s this two-way relationship where many people feel the reason they’re consuming media is to respond to it, that it’s not for the content. It’s so that they can use that content to have their response, their reader response. It’s not something to even criticize. It’s just how it is now. That is the expectation.

My favorite chapter in X is a 2500-word personal essay (which you can read publicly on Grantland) constructed to answer a single incongruity: “Why is watching a prerecorded sporting event less pleasurable than watching the same game live?” Some form of this question has at least mildly troubled every American since the 1960s, including myself, and Klosterman manages to provide an entertaining and concise analysis of this plight through his own wisdom. Its preface in the volume was written “in 2008, in Europe, when [Chuck] was pretend depressed.”

Last weekend I was in a hashish bar in Amsterdam. It was post-dusk, pre-night. The music was terrible (fake reggae, late-period Eric Clapton, Sublime deep cuts.) I was sitting next to a British stranger with a shaved head and a speech impediment. Our conversation required subtitles, so I imagined them in my mind. He told me he had lost three family members within the past year: his mother, who was sixty-six; his uncle, who was fifty-six; and his sister, who was forty-six. He said he’d just turned thirty-six. He asked if I saw a pattern developing. “Yes,” I said. “But only numerically.”
I asked what he did for a living. He said he was a housepainter. He asked me the same question about myself. “I manufacture opinions,” I said.
“Really?” he asked. “How do you know if you’re any good at that?”
“By the number of people who agree or disagree,” I said in response. “If a large number of strangers seem to think one of my opinions is especially true or wildly wrong, there is somehow a perception that I am succeeding at this vocation.”
“That’s interesting,” said the bald British man who could barely speak. “I guess house painting is a totally different thing.”
You’ll notice that his entire answer to the live television debacle is – again – entirely about control (or the lack thereof.) In fact, a desire for control also contributed to his choice of profession.
Part of the reason I became a writer is because it was this completely controlled reality where I could do this thing by myself where you’d go out and you’d do the interviews and stuff, but then you’re back by yourself, transcribing and then writing. Then, when the story is done and you send it off, that’s the end. Now that’s the middle. Now it’s like, when the story is published, it’s the middle of the process very often because the consumer feels differently now.
Rarely are situations or discussions that begin with back in my day actually constructive in any sense, but Chuck Klosterman appears to be the exception. If you’re willing to indulge him, you may find yourself reassured. He now writes from a remote cabin (with WiFi,) was tortured – like all of us – in sifting through and compiling his old work for X, and finds its index to be his favorite part.
“Exploring the index from a book you created is like having someone split your head open with an axe so that you can peruse the contents of your brain.”
He is willfully and completely ignorant of the Harry Potter franchise, yet able to sincerely witness and convey the nuances of back-to-back Creed and Nickelback concerts in a confident, fascinating technique of which any other music or culture writer would deprive you. Perhaps indescribably so, he is a modern scholar of American identity, through-and-through, and is in this way more equipped to tackle the unnerving conundrum of our country’s culture as it stands than any other non-fiction author I’ve recently read. Rather than give in to fear or loathing, Klosterman depends on his practiced curiosity (or apathy, as he repeatedly claims) to expertly channel his experiences within his familiar ESPN-watching, rock-listening, and daydreaming sphere through both quaint and profound truths.
In his X review for Paste Magazine, B. David Zarley proclaims essays to be “a love letter to a moment,” concluding that Chuck is “’effectively narcissistic,’ proving that culture essays can teach us something about ourselves and the people around us.” For The Washington Post, Justin Wm. Moyer notes “it’s hard to think of another writer who could make a 30-page, deeply reported essay about a North Dakota junior-college basketball game interesting,” suggesting that this new collection marks Klosterman’s ascendance from critic to philosopher. From what I’ve read to date, I would counter that he has always fulfilled the term to the extent of its usefulness in the 21st century, and is even now beginning to redefine it. Last January, he braved the “dystopic” Google Gates to speak critically for a crowd of Googlers, describing them as “an umbrella over the entire culture,” and urging caution and reflection in the coming future to keep them from doing “something bad.” His engagement with them – especially during the Q&A – is a fascinating insight into the Greater Google Mind, and I would encourage any invested parties in Chuck Klosterman’s role as a philosopher to watch the talk in full.

User-uploaded image: file.png

I was unfamiliar with “the boat-sails-wind analogy” before I read James Murphy’s interview for LCD Soundsystem’s “last album.”
“Your life is a boat, the sails are your emotions, and drugs are the wind. When you're a kid, your boat is small and your sail is huge, and drugs are like a hurricane.”
Control x Time = the Klosterman beat. I suppose this must be what other entertainment writers are referring to when they accuse Chuck of nostalgia trafficking, but I can’t be so sure. Though I’d like to think my own snout for the stuff is especially well-tuned, I am undeniably from a different planet - even auditorally. All but one or two of the musicians interviewed throughout X were entirely unknown to me by name, which Klosterman’s voice managed to make even more compelling – not to mention the included stories of athletes and the sports industry, which include stories of the human ego, paranoia, and complex drama that always manage to transcend their setting when articulated with such dexterity.

User-uploaded image: file.png
