# Transcript: "Audioblog for Sept 18, 2004" | Evil Genius Chronicles

<audio controls>
  <source src="http://www.evilgeniuschronicles.org/audio/egc-9-18-2004.mp3">
</audio>
[Page Source](https://evilgeniuschronicles.org/2004/09/18/)

Door walkthrough. Hello friends and neighbors. This is Dave Slusher, this is evil genius Chronicles for Saturday, September 18 2004. evil genius. chronicles.org is the website that is affiliated with this. Or really, I guess technically this audio blog is affiliated with the website. But either way, that's your resource. It's a overcast, you know, kind of warm, but you know, not sunshiny day here in Conway, South Carolina, as we are between the storms, and know more about storms, I'm sick of talking about hurricanes and crap like that. So I want It's day two, really of the BitTorrent experiment I yesterday, around lunchtime, I published a bit torrent for the previous day for Thursday's audio blog feed. And it kind of worked, it didn't know exactly what I was doing, I had to download, download the BitTorrent Python files to the server box set set, started up a tracker and kind of did all that kind of fun stuff, had to figure out how to create the torrent in the first place published it, you know, did the link. And so people actually got it down, it worked. And then last night, when I did the audio blog that I did as an experiment, I published it as a bit torrent. And then a couple hours later, I put it up as the normal link to an mp3 file. You know, and also so it was the enclosure feed. So for the first few hours or so the only way you could get it was as a bit torrent. And I sort of like that as an experiment. And I think I'll do that, continuing doing that. For the time being. It's interesting I was just using, so somewhere along the line. You know, like I was saying yesterday, I don't particularly want to set the seed up on my server box. Because I don't want that to have to use the bandwidth for that box. I mean, that's kind of a wash, you know, gain where you know, other people now are kind of CO seating. But what I'd like to do is just have the original seed, you know, where it's feasible, just be running on my homebox. Because, you know, that's, that's not my upload from my home, through my home cable time warner cable modem that's not metered in any way, you know, I have a cap and I can serve that cap. And there is no financial implication to that, I guess. Unless they tell me I'm violating a term of service or some crap like that. But until that point, I just assumed rather use the home bandwidth for the seating. And so, you know, I was just trying a few different things. Because I have multiple different machines that I was experimenting with, you know, I have to set my home router to forward ports to specific machines, right. So I've got one external IP address. And so you're supposed to route Port 6881 through 6889 to your machine problem is that I have more than one machine that was serving at the bit torrents. So things were a little bit funky and I wasn't quite exactly sure of all the implications of that to have like 688 I had an alternating like the evens were going to my laptop and the odds were going to my Linux box or something like that. And things never quite worked right. Quite right and so I could see people trying to get things down and I was not seating out and it was a little bit of a mess until I finally just said everything to the laptop and I found through seeing the user agent and people who are trying to download the bit torrents was this azureus this Java based BitTorrent client that tonight when I publish is going to I'm going to try to do the whole thing through it. I had used the mac os 10 tomato torrent client to create the torrent files for the first two. This time I'm going to try to see if I can just use a curious to you know create the torrent and do the seed and all that stuff kind of you know, in a one stop shopping, do the initial seeding and see how it works. It's I like it a lot better than say tomato torrent, which has that paradigm I really dislike about a lot of the BitTorrent clients which is the one window is a one window per download slash upload. So you start start one and you download it and now you're serving it out to other people. You have to keep that window open. You know killing that Windows thing stops it. Well that's really kind of a cluttery pain in the ass. interface design and clumsy I think Kind of a way to interact with this. And what I like about asurion is it's got the nice two pane display. And so it's very easy to have multiple things downloading and or uploading at the same time without being a real management problem. He can one nice little window that you can look at and minimize and maximize. And so I'm really liking this and, and so I haven't done the full lifecycle with the Azure areas yet. But we'll see how that goes. I can see right now even as I'm recording this, you know, I'm serving out, you know, most of my upstream bandwidth is going out, I can see we've got, like, we got five people seating, the Friday audio blog entry, and two other people, people other than me seating the Thursday. And people seem to think it's kind of funny when I refer to this all as the having the same kind of dynamics as the Amish barn raising, which is, you know, a lot of cool people that are listening to this are turning out to be pretty cool. Because, you know, a lot of people are more than willing to, you know, download the BitTorrent and then you know, leave the window open. So people have been saying that they'll leave it open for a day or so. So, I thank you all. And my server bill, thanks, you all, somewhere on the iPod, or Dev, I remember, somebody within the last few days was asking about a PayPal PIP jar, which, you know, I don't know if I'm going to do that for this. Because that's not really the scope I'm working in. Cuz, you know, I would much rather work from the angle of trying to get some form of sponsorship than, you know, kind of begging for nickels from the individual listeners. And in general, I just like that model better. Because for one thing, I don't want you all to have to pony up, you know, you're already you're already generating, you're already donating to the cause, you know, 20 minutes of your attention a day on average. And, you know, I think that's plenty from you, I don't need your cash as well. But if you don't mind, subletting, you know, 15 or 30 seconds of that attention per episode, to somebody else who's paying some bills, then I think that's the way to go. You know, as long as you stay under that point where there's so much noise, that signal gets drowned out, and that would be like your, you know, you listen to your typical morning show radio show within 20 minutes of the hours commercials. Well, it gets, you know, that's that's kind of kind of nonsense, but you know, like, you know, an NPR underwriting style thing, we have 1/32 announcement, you know, in a 2030 minute show, that's, that's, to me is a pretty good balance. You know, we did this in reality break, where we'd have one underwriting announcement in the show, and forget what we charged, I think was like, 100 bucks a week for the 32nd announcement. And, you know, and it was actually, the sounds to me, like a lot, but you know, and it seemed like a lot at the time. And we were on a main or High Water point, this was a small, always a small productions, eight stations. But, you know, it had a potential listenership of 10 million, because one of the stations was in Manhattan, it seemed like, it seemed like a little bit of money. But you know, that 100 bucks a week, for the places that most of the places, you know, dueling modems felt it because they were like, a startup at the time. But like, the book companies that, that were sponsoring us that I mean, that was so low as to, you know, they sneeze that off the table, right? It didn't really matter that much to him. And so it was almost like, you know, it funded us and it was like magic disappearing money to them. And I mean, they, they didn't notice it, God didn't notice it going out the door. So you know, I in general, I that's the way I prefer, I'm not really I have no, I have no particular plans to put a PayPal tip jar up anytime soon. If you do really feel like you want to do your part, you can always click a Google ad or three. And Andy, you know, if you're gonna do that, don't don't click any ads that you don't care about. That actually helps make things better if you if you see something that interests you on one of those Google ads, follow it, you know, and don't follow the things you don't care about. But, you know, I get I don't know, anywhere from a dime to like three bucks per one of those, you know, member and masa just audio blogging Manifesto, he was talking about how bad it was that you can't index the text. That's in some context, that's actually a good case, because Google hunts you down if you talk about the specifics of Google ads, but I'll bet if you put it in an audio blog, it would take a long time, possibly forever for them to find out about it. So I'm not gonna really gonna push my luck on that. But if I wanted to talk some specifics, that would get me you know, cut off from the program. I would probably do it in here and try to keep it off of the text radar. But well, I'm gonna push my luck. I do all right. Nothing that would nothing that would snap anyone's heads back. But actually, I make a little more money in those Google Ads than I would have thought. But you know, it's negligible and pretty much any way that you slice it up. Got an email All from August trauma, or trauma or trauma. And he's the guy that runs one of the scraping websites. html buff, I think he's what he said. And he's one of the guys that contributes to the iPad or dev mailing list. And he kind of felt like my comments yesterday about scraping and kind of the implications of you know, what it what it does for you on the publisher side, if somebody is creating a scraped feed, he thought that my comments were kind of directed straight at him, and I should have gone directly to him, which is kind of how I felt about Adam curry and the bug reports and getting closures. So I know where he's coming from. In point of fact, it was definitely not directed straight at him, because I've never seen his site. And it was really kind of directed to the general scraping conversation on iPod or Deb, which I'll be honest, I have not sent messages like really well, trying to handle and stand everything on them. I, at best skim them, because I just haven't had time to sit down and really, so definitely August, this was not, you know, I was not trying to hammer you specifically. I just was really actually I think the ice butter ice spider guys were talking about it. And that was mostly what I was thinking about. And so I you know, I don't want anyone to think that I'm hammering anyone individually. And in fact, by and large, especially considering that a lot of us are kind of writing scripts, if you thought about it in a specific way. A lot of people that are doing work on this iPod platform stuff could be thought to be in competition with each other. But you know, I don't think any of us feel like that. I mean, there are people who are doing scripts that, you know, we all kind of fill the same ecological niche, you know, starting with, you know, starting with Adam curry, and you know, everybody that's come behind and you know, myself and raceless Kinski with pie Potter and I spider and you know, the iPod or for Windows, and we're all kind of doing the same thing. And we're actually, I'm actually really pleasantly surprised like how well everybody is kind of working together. Andrew Gromit, you know, has his his script. And so everybody's just kind of taking the ideas from each other. And we're kind of freely stealing back and forth. And I'm happy, you know, if anybody finds anything of value in mind, I'd like to think that the thing I have injected in all this is getting people thinking about cash management and doing what you can to not download things, you know, as as well as possible, including the RSS feed. So that's the thing that I try to keep everybody thinking, thinking about. But you know, I know that my script has has a short lifetime, and it might already be up. I played a little with a spider today, which I liked a lot about it. It has had the installer, the Mac OSX, pass it package installer, it did, I would have liked a little more explicit, explicit, having it explicitly tell me what it was doing, like it set up an hourly cron job to run, which I didn't know about. And, you know, I wouldn't have set it to run every hour. You know, in fact, I didn't like that. And once I figured out that, that's what's happening, I changed it. But it would have been nice to have some sort of, you know, how often would you like it has some sort of like a dialog that interrogate you about what you want to happen. But by and large, it one of the thing I like about it is it works with the BitTorrent feat, so that's killer. And Damn, if he didn't get my own bit torrents down. And so I really dug that. So, you know, that's, that's all pretty cool. And I'll play with that a little more and see how that goes. But somewhere, you know, I, I consider the script that I wrote, and all these kinds of things that we're talking about. And I consider it all like a giant proof of concept prototype. And hopefully, what will come out of the iPod or dev is a single unified thing that we can all kind of get to and all work on and then have this one thing that goes out and it's just killer, and it's so good and so polished, and so and cross platform enough that this one thing will go out and be the gold standard. And like all I don't know how many of us there are no 50 or 100 of us that are kind of into this, you know, we'll have help birth this whole new interaction you know, kind of like what Mark topple like what he was talking about yesterday with his with the essay that he wrote and kind of creating this, you know, kind of shadow radio system that exists outside of Excel outside of the FCC and you know, similar agencies and other countries where we can fill that role without any of the downsides of that without being regulated. without, you know, without synchronicity, you know, being being required, you know, where you can get a very high, you know, very high rate, very high bandwidth thing. But because it comes down a synchronously, you know, you don't, you can get it on a slow connection, it just affects how much you can get down, but not that you can get it down asynchronous bundles of passion, the iPod platform. So, you know, the thought of being part of this, you know, the more I think about this, just the more excited I get about this mode of interaction, there's just such a world of possibility, you know, I feel kind of like, you know, I feel kind of like someone you know, in 1920 might have felt about radio, like, holy crap, look at all that can be done with this, you know, and so I am just so pleased with this community of people that springing up about out and around this idea. And, you know, I'm just so pleased to be a part of this, I am absolutely diggin this. And you know, I'm pleased as a developer, I'm pleased as a user of the platform, and I'm pleased as somebody who's putting out stuff for other people to listen to. And the by and large, people are listening. It's just it is rocking. And so, and I saw somebody, there's somebody has registered podcasting, dotnet, and I saw a podcaster or podcaster, dotnet. And I saw podcaster, as a user agent, you know, hitting my RSS feed, and I went and looked at it, and right now, it's just a coming soon page, but I'm gonna pay attention to that. I want to see who's who's got that and what they're doing. But that term, I think they've coined the term. So iPod platform just doesn't, you know, spring from the tongue, tongue. But what I'm doing right here, and what Adams doing and what Dave Winer is doing, and what it conversations and doing, that's podcasting. I think that is the term, I am using that from here on out, you know, so I am a podcaster. And they are podcasters. And I am podcasting right now. And you listen to my podcast, fucking a, I'd like to know who this is because you are one brilliant bastard cut. Damn, that's a good term. So that's, you know, it's sexy enough. That's the thing with this iPod stuff is the iPod as an item as an artifact that people use. It's a sexy thing. Little white plastic, but it's sexy. And so I always feel when you're doing this stuff on the iPod platform, feel like just the ideas and the terminology. That's got to be sexy, too. And that term is the first sexy term that I've heard used around this, you know, none of the terms that I was coining none of them are that sexy, this term rock. So that's podcasting. As far as I'm concerned, podcasting. Is it. fait accompli decision done? We're there. And you know, I've noticed because I have my Technorati plugin on my blossom, and you know, I have that dynamic referrers list, I keep a pretty good idea of people who are linking to my weblog. And so I kind of get mentioned in the same breath, as Dave Winer, and Adam curry and a lot of this, which, you know, I would be, you know, by far, the little, the annoying little brother of those guys, you know, I'm the cousin, like, Hey, guys, wait for me. But it's very, I'm very, very pleased to be like, mentioned in that company. But I'll ask saw, I see people kind of, that are coming around to this. And, you know, Tom was one, but I've seen, you know, a dozen or so, articles and web blog things much like that, where somebody was interested in what they had to offer, you know, got one of the scripts started up, you know, found themselves listening to the stuff being on their commute or on their iPod as they're driving to work or riding a train to work. And as they talk about us, what the three of us are doing, you know, the kind of audio blogging, pseudo radio style of interaction, there's a phrase that pops up almost verbatim from almost every one of those posts. And it is more interesting than it sounds. And it's almost uniform. Every one of these things says, it's just one dude, you know, kind of talking about whatever, you know, wonky thing. He is interesting, but it's more interesting than it sounds. Oh, that's damning with faint praise or not. But that seems to be pretty much the gold standard of the way people are talking about this. And, again, you know, about things I'm pleased with, I guess I'm pleased to be more interesting than I sound. I can live with that. Better than being less interesting than you sound right. So, you know, and I thank everybody that's been Lincoln. And, you know, a while ago, I thought it was really funny. When I found my weblog. You know, it was listed in blog shares, which you know, a lot of them are, I guess, I don't know how they get added to it. I'm sure that it just got crawled and added automatically. But I found people that had bought and sold my weblog. And what was funny is that most of the people and this was maybe eight months ago, most of the people They had done it took a huge bath, because I think they bought it. Like right around the time that duck Searles had a link to me. And then it was just, you know, from there and just went off a cliff. So everybody that did it, like lost a big fortune and have their, you know, whatever, bullshit plugshare money. So, if, as things are kind of creeping upwards, you know, lately, if you are one of those blog share people, it might not be a bad idea to buy shares of this weblog because people are linking in more than they have been lately. So you might have a little growth potential. I'm just saying, you know, as I have enough, you know, web obsessive compulsive hobbies that, but blog shares just never moved me. I spend enough time on Where's George, that? You know, that's pretty much my useless web time spent on that. Blog shares. You know, I used to be on the Hollywood Stock Exchange. And that was just, at some point, I said, if I'm, why aren't I spending this amount of money on my actual real money brokerage accounts and the damn Hollywood Stock Exchange. So I stopped to stop farting around with that. And so, last thing I'm going to talk about today, I got a cool email. And this is one of the greatest things about weblogging. And talking about bands is I got an email from Nate of the side runners, which is one of the bands that I have talked about on my weblog and made band of the day. You know, kind of like being king of nothing, as I say, being my band of the day. But it's I I got this album, lent to me at work when I was working in orbits, and you know, somebody said, Hey, why don't you listen to that a bunch of us like traded CDs amongst ourselves, and we all ripped them to you know, our iTunes or MMS or whatever we were using on our computers. And one of the guys let me decide Runner's, which is somewhere between an alt country cow punk band and straight country, man, they kind of work, you know, all along that, that, that field there. So I got an email from Nate from the side runners, saying, you know, thanking me for writing about him and the weblog and saying how he was listening to the audio blog, which seems like, you know, I thank you, Nate. You know, that seemed like a lot of effort to go to, but you know, I appreciate it, brother. But, and he was in his email, he was really funny, because he said, Dude, I love the ri a, just kidding. And his, his particular thing is he he's seeing Gresham's law you know, apply to the music business, in the you know, the good money drives, the bad money drives out good. And so he sees his particular beef is not the same one as I am is still like crappy bad band cover band, things are driving out the people who are trying to do originals and trying to do artistically good stuff, don't get the big money shows, it's just these guys who, you know, aren't even trying and they're going out and playing, you know, limp biskit covers, and they're getting the money. And I that's definitely a concern. And, you know, it's probably been a constant concern for you know, the last 40 years, but I'm with you. And so the side runner, I'm going to play a song from the side runners, and hopefully, Nate won't see me and I'll have a link get this out. This is a great album. I really really like it. If you like any of the great Cal punk bands, or even the punk punk bands, you know, they're they're you know, if you like x, you're gonna like this band, if you like Jason and the scorchers you gonna like this band? I just think they rock and so I'm gonna play one of their songs. There's several of them that I really really like and this one, something about it. At the time that I first heard this I was living in Cook County so maybe that had a little bit Cook County blues from the side runners. This is our song of the day. Well, the jury say I was guilty. Oh, my mother back. Bless my boy Have mercy. Never make it out. You'll never make it county Well I've got nothing left to kill myself man rod and Sam this never make it out alive. As my heart is saying, county friends My heart is saying good man. Good county friends. All right, there you go. Once again, that's from the side runners album ain't inventing the wheel. And I'll have a link on the text blog at evil genius chronicles.org where you can go to their web page and you can go buy that album, man. I think it's great. The whole album is like stuff like that. It just rocks. It will rock your ass off. Man. I love this band. And I wish that I had found out about them, you know, earlier than right before I left Chicago so I had a chance to go see him live. And I when I emailed Nate, I hope that someday they'll tour down to the southeast and I'll get a chance to go see him and buy them barbecue and maybe put them up in our big house here. When the groceries groceries calm when the groceries toured through Atlanta, they stayed at the house and they liked it because we have enough computers everyone can check their email at the same time. So side renters if you come by we'll work out the same deal. All right. Well, that's been the evil genius Chronicles for Saturday, September 18 2004. Thanks everybody for listening. If you have any feedback, you can email it to D slusher@gmail.com. You can go to the text blog at evil genius chronicles.org and keep listening and keep them BitTorrent windows open.

Thank you all catch again next time. Bye.