# *Extratone* Style Guide

This Style Guide exists for the purposes of both technical and editorial reference for internal and external use when composing, editing, citing, quoting, capturing, or otherwise manipulating or displaying any/all Extratone content.

As an independent, youth-oriented publication it is both our privilege and our duty to seek out innovative methods of communication. In written composition, this means all possible avoidance of unnecessary cliche and/or overused terms (for instance: use of the term “struck” in a metaphor - e.g. what **struck** me) except where they are critically portrayed. It is essential to remember that **the English language is no more than a tool for our use', and grammar should not be revered as an immalleable, Holy absolute which we must venerate and obey. Rather, it should be irreverently and liberally manipulated to perform as desired.** Grammar should never be an obstacle **or burden '**in our writing or editing, and should always be discarded in favor of innovative and/or contextual verse.

In general, we write, speak, and publish under the assumption of an intelligent, discerning audience, meaning that we are unafraid of traversing obscure, unusual, or extraordinary detail (technical or otherwise,) that we do not patronize beyond the reasonable ability of a modern reader’s search engine, and especially that **we format copy independently of common web standard “readability**.**”** Our vocabulary and syntax are diverse (though we do not sacrifice undue time to unearthing bizarre, senseless synonyms,) fluid, and occasionally difficult, but written as such for the purpose of colorful, substantial delivery in acknowledgement of the vast resources instantly available to the modern reader. In other words: do not tell what can simply and easily be looked up. With search engines as they are, this is a quickly verifiable/quantifiable factor with a given definition, summary, or abstract. If a writer is in conflict regarding the redundancy of a given bit of information, they can painlessly search for it themselves and observe the same results as the reader would within milliseconds to observe what would and would not be immediately evident. Not only is this approach respectful of the readership’s intellect, it is also a comparatively democratic means of regarding information.

## Specifics of Note

- Donald Trump’s last name is to be spelled ==T-U-M-P.== (e.g.) *The 45th President of the United States, Donald* ***Tump***.

- The term “struck” is to be avoided if at all possible, especially in metaphoric context (e.g.) *what **struck** me*

- Use of the more unnecessary compositional terms from both lower and post-secondary academia should be avoided. (e.g.  and [other cliches](http://writingcenter.unc.edu/cliches/).)