May 10, 2017

A year of blasphemy {.subject}
===================

by [David Blue](https://twitter.com/FickleCrux)

I've just spent what seems like way too much time writing my first real
addition to [*Words of David Blue in
Red*](http://extratone.com/inred) in a very long time. It begins with
the story I told you last time - about how I got the police called on me
for threatening to kill myself - and ends up arguing (more or less) that
the Apostle John's *Book of Revelation* is about Facebook. \

![](../../../gallery.tinyletterapp.com/e8ecb4f78686444d5a5c89d53c49de7c8feb8ac5/images/937b7527-f37e-4a03-a9eb-78095036f149.png)\
 If you've got the time, [have a look](http://extratone.com/words/fuck).
It's unquestionably the most beautiful of the *Letters*, at least.\
 \
 One year ago yesterday, I published *[Johnny Tsunami 6: Separate, But
Equal](http://bit.ly/disneyclass), *which is technically - if I'm
remembering correctly - the first thing I actually wrote *for* the site.
I spent some time tonight updating it, visually, and I think I'm going
to record a reading for [*Drycast*](http://extratone.com/drycast) and
[our Anchor station](http://extratone.com/anchor).\
 \
 (If you're kind enough to want to share one/both of these, they can be
found at extratone.com/fuck and extratone.com/johnny, respectively.)\
 \
 I'd like to restore every piece, eventually, and I continue to have
more and more templates from which to do so as we constantly change
things up. I think the [CrossCabriolet
story](http://bit.ly/egodivide)'ll probably be the next to get it.
Spending time on my own writing seems a bit counter-intuitive, but
growing the contributorship has been slow-going, as you know, and I've
decided to focus on my perspective a bit more until going to the West
coast, next year.

* * * * *

I'm still not sure what the pieces actually are, exactly, but I've ended
up satisfied (...eventually) with every one of them, but only after
hours and hours of obsessive
revision.![](../../../gallery.tinyletterapp.com/e8ecb4f78686444d5a5c89d53c49de7c8feb8ac5/images/a74a7833-37bf-4058-a003-078e4f6e8a08.png)Yeah.
That's why I started this TinyLetter.\
 \
 I do have a standard - if not a template - for their pace and tone, but
I've never bothered to actually write it out - partially because I
receive very little feedback on them, whatsoever.\
 \
 Which would be understandable from this crowd - they *are* just massive
walls of text, I guess - but... they're funny!? Of course, *I *think
so.\
 \
 It's hard to imagine their purpose if it's not entertainment, and I
suppose that's why my readership is minimal. (I'm assuming it is,
anyway.) If my 'intended' audience is like-minded folks, it would seem
I'll never have one, but a significant ideal in the *Extratone* mantra
is... ignoring the audience's wants, basically. I no longer do so
completely, myself, but of course - everything is
complex.![](../../../gallery.tinyletterapp.com/e8ecb4f78686444d5a5c89d53c49de7c8feb8ac5/images/92f6c045-3bcf-45be-8187-5c184784a1fd.jpg)

Since [buying a laptop](http://www.extratone.com/tech/usury/) for the
first time in years, I’ve definitely marginalized the buffer between my
mind and the website, but I’m not sure if the effects have all been
positive. I’ve been working on reducing the “thoughs,” “of course’s,”
“surprisingly’s,” etc, but I think I may have actually taken a few steps
backward since I was [writing on my
phone](http://www.extratone.com/words/inred/mono/) with a blutooth
keyboard. (Yes, feel free to laugh at me.)

 

None of this is consequential, of course, but I’ve begun to think I
should take the opportunity to really assess my own process while I'm
still here, considering that I’ve yet to do so in a truly analytical
light. 

* * * * *

We are 8 days away from *Extratone’*s first birthday, which is going to
be emotional, for many reasons. I’ve gotten more support than I expected
in some regards, and less in others. I honestly thought there were more
folks within my network who’d be interested in regularly contributing,
but I did not expect so many *local*friends to be so supportive.

 

We’re going to the Broadway Brewery - where Tim & I have been
frequenting for a good while - and I’m going to bring my laptop to
include those of the distant staff who’re interested in participating. 

 

Naturally, my Editor’s Letter for this month is going to be quite long,
sentimental, and redundant, but I’ve decided that our homepage will
contain nothing but a list of people who’ve supported/contributed to
this project along the way, including the handful I no longer have any
contact with.

 

I suppose I should probably get started on that.

* * * * *

For the first time since last summer, Eryn and I spent some four hours
driving around rural Missouri listening to country music, last night,
which stirred up all sorts of emotions about this place, again, got
[this song](https://youtu.be/Eo2OIUpWznY) stuck in my head (where it’s
remained,) and revealed that *Rascal Flatts* tunes are actually quite
nuanced, often? Other than *Life is a Highway*, of course.

 

I wouldn't call Missouri's offerings *temptations*, per se, but I will
no longer be surprised if I find some difficulty in separation. There’s
plenty of ignorance, yes, but also a particular kindness that may one
day provide a welcome sanctuary for an older, withering, even-more-weary
me. I’ve grown to hate Columbia’s increasingly diligent destruction of
its identity, but the more rural bits have older substance which I hope
I don’t have to mourn, one day.

 

If you have any thoughts you’d like to retort with, remember that you
can simply reply to this email.

 

Till next time,

David

[tinyletter](http://tinyletter.com)

[Subscribe](https://tinyletter.com/DavidBlue)

[Archive](../archive.html) [\<](david-and-the-bilge.html)
[\>](assumed-suicidal-but-impervious-to-email-fatigue.html)
