May 15, 2017

David and the Bilge {.subject}
===================

by [David Blue](https://twitter.com/FickleCrux)

We've all known that *Radiolab* is superb since its origin, but I didn't
really start taking the time to listen to podcasts methodically again
(since I used to listen to *Eve Online* shows and such) until last year,
when my time was opened wide thanks to a series of separations,
redirections, and a pink slip.\
 \
 When I heard *[David and the
Wire](http://www.radiolab.org/story/david-and-wire/)*, it *really* hit
me: things had changed, and audio storytelling's future is brilliant. I
will never forget it.\
 \
 "The uniform."\
 \
 "If you do try to capture that moment, you're sort of... *out* of that
moment."

* * * * *

Sitrep: 6 pills remaining for the next two weeks. Semi-frantically
scrambling to churn out my 12th [Editor's
Letter](http://extratone.com/freq), and trying my best to maintain a
state of 100% emotional integrity with myself regarding the one-year
anniversary of *Extratone*'s launch.\
 \
 [All available
indication](https://twitter.com/FickleCrux/status/862460460548993024)
has pointed toward a steadily-increasing pitch in just about any curve
you can measure of such a thing. I'll save any more detail for the
letter, but I did create [/cactus](http://extratone.com/cactus) for
[Tim](http://twitter.com/extratonemarx),
[/dixie](http://extratone.com/dixie) for
[Madeline](http://twitter.com/madelineallman) (which is probably the
best subdomain in history,) and acquired
[bilge.world](http://bilge.world) to forward to the
[/bilge](http://extratone.com/bilge) page I made for myself.\
 \
 I paused long enough to re-read [*Feebles in
Night*](http://bit.ly/Feebles) for the first time in what seems like
ages, and it occurred to me that I should've made the .pdfs of
[it](http://bit.ly/feeblespdf) and the [*Children of the Corn 30*
screenplay](http://bit.ly/cotc30) accessible to you for free a long time
ago. Sorry about that.\
 \
 All of the sudden, I am sick as hell, which is surprisingly rare,
considering the way I treat myself, but - given my rapidly-dwindling
supply of adderall (the most effective decongestant I've ever
encountered,) and my recent purchase of two unfiltered Camel packs (the
town is *completely* depleted of Lucky Strikes, somehow,) **I may
actually die tonight**.\
 \
 Farewell forever,\
 David

[tinyletter](http://tinyletter.com)

[Subscribe](https://tinyletter.com/DavidBlue)

[Archive](../archive.html)
[\<](i-am-still-coughing-and-sending-emails-to-myself.html)
[\>](a-year-of-blasphemy.html)
