June 27, 2017

Get Waxed {.subject}
=========

by [David Blue](https://twitter.com/FickleCrux)

Unfortunately, I wasted these letters' best subject line yet on [this
unfinished one](http://bit.ly/psalmswaxed), left two weeks ago when I
ran out of adderall.\
 \
 It was a particularly fun and restful vacation, but I am once again
pilled-up and Ready To Tweet.\
 \
 Another ("complete") letter will be headed your way soon, I'm sure, but
in the interim, there's **the [first episode](http://bit.ly/rdadguns)
of [*Runnin' Down a Dream*](http://extratone.com/dream) to listen to!**
(That's the show Eryn, Maddie, and have been planning to produce since
Spring about our local shenanigans.)\
 \
 And! Isiah's killed it once again with his hilarious [Yelp!
bit](http://bit.ly/isiahyelp) that's currently gracing the frontpage.\
 \
 I'll talk to ya soon.

* * * * *

![](../../../gallery.tinyletterapp.com/e8ecb4f78686444d5a5c89d53c49de7c8feb8ac5/images/6f72c928-c9b5-4193-a432-4acb41d1e82b.jpg)

AMPHETAMINE COUNT: 0
====================

I heard a 15-year-old say it to his friend after he was berated for dropping a bag of chips, and it’s now my new favorite phrase.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The other night, I was a bit upset over some Very Old News, so Eryn took
me driving (God bless,) and I said something really insightful, under
the influence:\
 \
 *What ends up important to you is a combination of what was important
to your parents, what you never had, and what you couldn't have
imagined.*\
 \
 Of course, I didn’t intend for these to become yet *another*form of
Extratone aggregation, but it would appear that a *personal*newsletter
for me, at this point, isn’t altogether too different from those you
receive from your [*Editor-in-Chief*](http://extratone.com/freq), and it
looks like I should get as much word to you, ASAP, as I’ve run out of
pills until the 28th.\
 \
 *Is it possible to ironically hyperlink?*\
 \
 You **need** to have a look at [Isiah’s account of his Soylent
experience](http://bit.ly/isiahsoylent) - it’s genuinely entertaining
and educational. Also, I made my [best
attempt](http://bit.ly/tractorblogging), yesterday, at those end-of-week
Best of the News lists that EiCs occasionally
maintain.[![](../../../gallery.tinyletterapp.com/e8ecb4f78686444d5a5c89d53c49de7c8feb8ac5/images/a9c01315-90ea-475a-ba43-523e9c417d9d.jpg)](https://twitter.com/FickleCrux/status/873667429318230017)Somehow,
I managed to lose my glasses when Eryn and I went out, Friday night. I
can’t remember the last time I’ve been without corrective lenses in
These Fucked Streets. I’ve had to enlarge the text on my phone and
laptop to Huge, Elderly mode, which is very embarrassing. I am now
carless, blind, and - for some reason - grieving again over [the big
happening,] but at least the website is doing well!!!

[tinyletter](http://tinyletter.com)

[Subscribe](https://tinyletter.com/DavidBlue)

[Archive](../archive.html)
[\<](learning-how-to-say-goodbye-to-the-past.html)
[\>](blowing-smoke.html)
