April 16, 2017

The Millennial Startup Chronicles \#88325632 {.subject}
============================================

by [David Blue](https://twitter.com/FickleCrux)

![](../../../gallery.tinyletterapp.com/e8ecb4f78686444d5a5c89d53c49de7c8feb8ac5/images/73e0b47f-72ae-402b-8391-fe0dce5d020b.jpg)

*The Pitch: Dirty, Digital, Defective?*

 

White people *really* like to sit around and talk about things, and about talking about things.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

They like [making up their own datapoints](https://youtu.be/bNpx7gpSqbY)
to plug in rudimentary stat formulas in order to produce colorful
graphics to show to identical audiences who surely would not be present
and participatory without some kind of stimulant in their system.

\
 I am particularly vulnerable to the sort of abstract thinking
institutions like TED pervade, which is why I have always been very way
of them. Yesterday, I said something insightful of myself to my friend
Tevin:

> "I'm great at identifying problems, but am utterly inept at coming up
> with solutions, which is why I am a writer."

In past projects, my failure has over and over been in an overemphasis
on ideas, and a deficit of attention to any tangible product. I write my
ed's letters in an ultra-meta perspective in the hope that I'll be able
to keep myself in check until I'm able to build a salaried editorial
team around me. It's also why I have been killing myself polishing both
my own words and the look of the site, itself. I want to be sure that -
when the opportunity arises to present *Extratone *to investors - I have
a liberal surplus of ***product***to depend on.\
 \
 I have spent the past few months riding a day-to-day pendulum
between *I am insane* and *I am a genius* in ever more precarious
angles, which you can consider *pro-health* in my case, I think. I'm
just now realizing a use for that *passion* word in my life, though my
rate of progress is not exactly blistering. While I am now Verified
Invested emotionally in *Extratone*, I exist at an inadequate emotional
intelligence - in many areas - to handle the consequences of such an
investment appropriately. But again... **this is a good thing**. Though
I suppose I couldn't have chosen to improve myself in a single more
public (not necessarily *popular*)
means.[![](../../../gallery.tinyletterapp.com/e8ecb4f78686444d5a5c89d53c49de7c8feb8ac5/images/aac83edb-8741-4d52-b385-578f4c8ed557.jpg)](https://twitter.com/FickleCrux/status/852939174437158913)

*Please get me the fuck out of here.*

 

### **I am terrified by the *'power of the startup,'***and by the number of adolescents who appear to be pursuing 'careers' in gaming and streaming. {style="text-align: left;"}

Tevin and I talked about this on what's probably the best
[episode](http://extratone.com/futureland/hater) of *Futureland* to
date. Our childhoods were both particularly notable examples of the *you
can be anything you want to be *generation. I inexplicably began
recording things as early as toddlerhood, and he began playing around
with video in his fifth grade. Neither of us ever quit, really, so we
both have a difficult-to-manifest body of skills that we acquired in the
pursuit of a final product, or by *a whole lotta fuckin around.*\
 \
 Now, we are both trying to make careers out of our happenstance
proficiencies. Apparently, Tevin makes *some* money freelance video
editing, but he's also a competitive gamer. A good one. He was 13th in
the world for Mortal Kombat 9, and he's still very keen on getting good,
but remains acutely aware of the reality of it all. Perhaps it's because
he grew up black in a Kansas working class home.

### "I don't want to make money the way it's being made right now" still contains "I don't want to make money."

I've spent the entirety of my adulthood 'joking' about my ambition and
moneymaking, but I've ended up a bit Marxist in day-to-day life, if I'm
honest. That said, there's one quote from the girl I used to infiltrate
Amway (that's uh... a story that'll still have to wait a bit) that's
continued to seem more and more insightful.

> You can't help anybody without any money.

I have a lot to offer, but it's almost never needed more than just...
cash. I suspect a big reason Extratone's patreon hasn't been more
successful is that my friends & audience are mostly 'creatives' and
therefore very broke, always. I think we're all capable of being a
worthwhile investment for the general public, but I haven't been able to
articulate *why* in a manner they can understand. (Which is one of the
reasons I'm writing these.)\
 \
 Of course, the second I started publicly using the word *startup*, my
YouTube recommendations became ridiculous. I complied with one video,
yesterday, and was surprised to hear [something personally
relatable](https://youtu.be/toVTP-vcsk8?t=18m35s) (if vague) from Stevie
Jobs.

> ...to know that you can plant something in the world, and it'll
> grow...

Always with the agricultural metaphors. \
 I've never been a big fan of the *The Fruit Man*, but I feel like I
understand him, now, for better or worse. It's strange to be using the
same language I've heard from the looniest individuals I've encountered
so far in life. Most of them also consider(ed) themselves unique, but
really... aren't. Not that the uniqueness of a body matters, just that
of what it says,; and I still think my comrades and I have something
worthwhile, in that regard.\
 \
 This is the essence of the divide I have been repeatedly teetering
across, as of late: I *really am* a human being, and I love them, but I
am also *definitely* strange, and find communicating with them to be
frustrating, at times. My religion has always been **aspiration**,
though I did know it by name when I was powerless and required to
inhabit other churches, as a child. As I've gotten older, I've grown to
understand its interdependence with **curiosity**, and have become
especially committed to keeping both alive in myself those whom I care
about for as long as I can. After 2015's crises and subsequent
alcoholism, I've resolved in this commitment a sort of purpose in life.

* * * * *

[![Whoa.](https://f4.bcbits.com/img/a3160166915_16.jpg)](https://davidblue.bandcamp.com/track/part-iv-3)

*Click this bullshit to hear an especially creative track from my latest
tape, *Four.

I've been playing the piano *a lot* recently, and even began a Big Ole'
Post for the site, detailing my now 20-year-long relationship with *The
Dear Chordophone*. Naturally, there's been internal debate as to whether
or not it belongs on *Extratone*. Coincidentally or not, the story is in
keeping with what we've planned for *Summer Edition*. (It involves boys
& trauma.) As saturated as I've become with sincerity, it's still a
little cringey to imagine such self-indulgence appearing immediately
after I've begun soliciting for subscribers. Here's an early
preview.![](../../../gallery.tinyletterapp.com/e8ecb4f78686444d5a5c89d53c49de7c8feb8ac5/images/0396f1fe-80a3-4d38-a085-7755581456a2.png)Let
me know if it's too genuine to survive. (You can actually reply to these
emails, which is pretty handy.)\
 \
 I now have 60mg of Adderall left until the 30th, which should make for
one more productive day. I guess we'll see if I'll be compelled to write
one of these without it.\
 \
 Till next time,\
 David

[tinyletter](http://tinyletter.com)

[Subscribe](https://tinyletter.com/DavidBlue)

[Archive](../archive.html)
[\<](pros-woes-of-my-tardy-existential-toddlerhood.html)
[\>](dinkus.html)
