---
title: "Redefining Word Processing"
date: "2020-10-19"
---

_An essay I wrote for school which I am not particularly happy with. Possibly worth revision in the future - I took [extensive notes](https://www.notion.so/rotund/Definition-Essay-a62bac1fd94e4f5bab4446e8031ba32d)._

Among a literary culture _very_ well into its reactionary movement against perceived consequences of the technological wealth it so rapidly built in the past forty years or so, many of us who write have done our best to avoid thinking about the tools we use to keep moving in our favorite pursuit, at least since The Web overwhelmed any and all discontented discourse reacting to all the _other_ temptations, oddities, and uniquely-modern consequences resulting from computers until that point, where they had remained a sole companion for the vast majority of us. Throughout the history of digital text manipulation software, there has been a more or less unspoken differentiation between _Word Processors_ and _Text Editors_, arguably determined by the destination of their output. _Edited_ text is that which is destined to remain digital, while _processed_ words have been prepared for the transition to a physical medium, via printing. I do not intend to engage in the petty dispute between these, but rather to extend the definition of the former in a big way.

To first arrive upon a general definition, we draw from Dr. Matthew Kirschenbaum’s efforts to do the same in his Preface of _Track Changes: A Literary History of Word Processing_:

> The conjoining of the word “word” with the word “processing” or “processor” has at various times been used to denote **principles of office management**, **an actual person** (typically female), **a physical hardware device**, or **a piece of intangible software**. It has also encompassed not only the written production of text with a keyboard but also verbal dictation, shorthand note taking, and the duplication, mailing, and filing of documents.
> 
> Preface, _Track Changes: A Literary History of Word Processing_

For our sake, _Britannica_’s entry for “[word processor](https://www.britannica.com/technology/word-processor)” is a good starting point:

> Computer program used to **write** and **revise documents**, **compose** the **layout of the text**, and preview on a computer monitor how the printed copy will appear.
> 
> "[Word processor](https://www.britannica.com/technology/word-processor)" | Britannica

Today’s offerings in both the generally accepted categories of _word processors_ and _text editors_ are all very much capable of these three primary functions across a spectrum of functionality. The most rudimentary form of the latter – Notepad in Windows and its MacOS equivalent, Text Edit – are themselves able to print documents without any addition or modification. A user is able to specify rudimentary layout settings like margins, headers, and footers, though these are notably not represented live in their respective compositional interfaces, which – in their ultra-lightweight  design – are unbound by the dimensions of a physical page, as the blank Microsoft Word document in our mind’s eye is (in its default state, called the Print Layout.) A [reference article from _Computer Nostalgia_](http://www.computernostalgia.net/articles/HistoryofWordProcessors.htm) suggests, more succinctly, “while offering facilities for composing and editing text, \[Text Editors\] do not format documents.”

Many argue that for most use cases, the complex schemas and programs necessary to translate digital text into the printed page are an unnecessary burden and have been doing so for decades. In the [October 1997 issue of _Linux Gazette_](https://linuxgazette.net/issue22/words.html), technology writer Larry Ayers critiques a bothersome “notion” apparently pondered on by computer users at the time: “the idea that a complex word processor is the only tool suitable for creating text on a computer.” He argues that – unless working toward the eventual transition to print using proprietary word processing formats in a business setting – “a good text editor has more power to manipulate text and is faster and more responsive.” Without delving into our own unnecessary detail, it’s worth touching on the contrast in performance resources available between even the most high-end machines of 1997 and mobile handsets, today. Frugality as a consideration has therefore sunk on the core list of software development priorities in a big way, though – mathematically, anyway – not enough to be even remotely mathematically equivalent to the exponential, unfathomable figures of increased processing power, since, and so the conservationist argument for _Text Editors_ in place of _Word Processors_ is defeated in one sense, all the while directly birthing a need for restraint in another. At our current stage of computing, the same language of limitations has long since become completely irrelevant in the case of virtually all text manipulation software, making way for an entirely new set of limits and boundaries determined by the composer’s mind.

“[The computer has evolved into a partner, a tool, and an environment](https://www.notion.so/rotund/A-companion-a-tool-and-an-environment-94f3631ac88248f89165ae0f17c12b0b),” science fiction author David Gerrold remarked in a quite profound 1982 _InfoWorld_ editorial. His second-next paragraph puts one immediately back into perspective though, when it observes with genuine astonishment:

> Today, there are probably several hundred authors who have computers of their own; the list of those authors reads like a _Who's Who_ in Science-Fiction... Most of the authors I know say they use their computers primarily as word processors.

Many first-time Word Processor users were also first-time computer users, who would therefore associate the two intimately, along with the new concepts digitizing their writing would present: intangibility, impermanence and permanence simultaneously, a newfound mutability of their copy, and the abstract possibility of “the _perfect_ manuscript.” Notably, we have discussed computing as yet only as a singular activity, but Word Processing would play a more significant role than one might imagine in the transition of the personal computer into a social device, especially if we consider Blogging the original social media institution. Using Microsoft Word as the most convenient example, we discover several layers within the software as it ships today that are stacked upon its original print-destined functions. Most visible of these is the “Web Layout” view, which converts the writing space into one like the “boundless” web-native ones before described in Notepad. Enabled but hidden by default is a section in the main menus (called the “Ribbon” since Word 2013) entitled “Blog Post,” containing tools for a workflow originally intended to allow users to integrate and public directly to their blogging platform of choice.\[efn\_note\]\[1\] A mainstream example: the Word to WordPress workflow as [tutorialed by _PC World_](https://www.pcworld.com/article/2602862/how-to-start-blogging-with-microsoft-word.html) in 2014.\[/efn\_note\]

Nearly all of the platforms we commonly associate with the term “social media” can trace their origins directly to blogging. Though it is not customary to compose text messages, Tweets, Facebook posts, or Instagram captions in a Word Processor\[efn\_note\]\[1\] Though there are templates available in the official Office store like “[Social Media Checklist](https://templates.office.com/en-us/social-media-checklist-tm33568166)” and – most bizarrely – the “[Uplifting Social Content Creator](https://templates.office.com/en-us/uplifting-social-content-creator-tm16402956)” template.\[/efn\_note\] (to my knowledge,) I would argue that such composition is still a form of _Word Processing_. Though these words are rarely meant for print, they are not meant to sit in a latent README file, deep in the directories of some piece of software, either. They are composed, edited, and layed out with varying degrees of intent – from the entirely unrevised “shitpost” to the deeply-considered fan-serving joke. In this way, these digital words are _Processed_.
