# "Who Says What to Whom on Twitter" | Authors: Wu, S.; Hofman, J.M.; Mason, W.A.; Watts, D.J.

*07-05-2021 06:00* 

> We study several longstanding questions in media communications research, in
the context of the microblogging service Twitter, regarding the production, flow, and consumption of
information.  To do so, we exploit a recently introduced feature of 
Twitter---known as Twitter lists---to distinguish between elite users, 
by which we mean specifically celebrities, bloggers, and representatives of media outlets and other formal organizations, and ordinary
users.  Based on this classification, we find a striking concentration of attention on Twitter---roughly
50% of tweets consumed are generated by just 20K elite users---where the
media produces the most information, but celebrities are the most followed. 
We also find significant homophily within
categories: celebrities listen to celebrities, while bloggers listen to
bloggers etc; however, bloggers in general rebroadcast more information
than the other categories. Next we re-examine the classical ``two-step
flow'' theory of communications, finding considerable support for it on
Twitter, but also some interesting differences.  Third, we find that URLs 
broadcast by different categories of users or containing different types of content  
exhibit systematically different lifespans.  And finally, we examine the attention 
paid by the different user categories to different news topics.
### Abstract:

We study several longstanding questions in media communications research, in the context of the microblogging service Twitter, regarding the production, flow, and consumption of information. To do so, we exploit a recently introduced feature of Twitter---known as Twitter lists---to distinguish between elite users, by which we mean specifically celebrities, bloggers, and representatives of media outlets and other formal organizations, and ordinary users. Based on this classification, we find a striking concentration of attention on Twitter---roughly 50% of tweets consumed are generated by just 20K elite users---where the media produces the most information, but celebrities are the most followed. We also find significant homophily within categories: celebrities listen to celebrities, while bloggers listen to bloggers etc; however, bloggers in general rebroadcast more information than the other categories. Next we re-examine the classical \`\`two-step flow'' theory of communications, finding considerable support for it on Twitter, but also some interesting differences. Third, we find that URLs broadcast by different categories of users or containing different types of content exhibit systematically different lifespans. And finally, we examine the attention paid by the different user categories to different news topics.

  

### Download:

-   [twitter-flow.pdf](http://web.archive.org/web/20110122041201/http://research.yahoo.com/files/twitter-flow.pdf)
***

==**1410**== Words

- **[Who Says What to Whom on Twitter | Yahoo! Research](http://web.archive.org/web/20110122041201/http://research.yahoo.com/pub/3386)**
